104 — Workflow Caching and Optimization
Speed up CI/CD pipelines with intelligent caching strategies. Learn dependency caching, Docker layer caching, and workflow optimization techniques to reduce build times.

Step 1 Measure baseline performance
Establish current workflow speed before optimization.

Commands to Run
cd cicd-testing
gh run list --limit 5 --json durationMs,name,conclusion
gh run list --limit 5 --json name,conclusion,startedAt,updatedAt(in window)
gh run view --log | grep 'Elapsed time'

What This Does
Before optimizing, measure current performance. GitHub tracks duration of each step and total workflow time.

Expected Outcome
You'll see workflow durations, likely 2-4 minutes total. 'Install dependencies' step probably takes 30-60 seconds.

Pro Tips
1 Baseline metrics help prove optimization effectiveness
2 Focus on slowest steps first for biggest impact
3 Dependency installation is usually the slowest step
4 Track improvements after each optimization

Step 2 Add npm caching to workflow
Cache node_modules to speed up subsequent runs.

Commands to Run
cat > .github/workflows/cached-test.yml << 'EOF'
name: Cached Tests

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v4
    
    - name: Setup Node.js with caching
      uses: actions/setup-node@v4
      with:
        node-version: '20'
        cache: 'npm'
    
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: npm ci
    
    - name: Run tests
      run: npm test
EOF

git add .github/workflows/cached-test.yml
git commit -m 'Add npm caching'
git push
gh run watch

What This Does
The cache: 'npm' option automatically caches npm dependencies based on package-lock.json. Subsequent runs restore cache instead of downloading everything.

Expected Outcome
First run: cache miss, downloads all dependencies. Second run: cache hit, 'Install dependencies' completes in ~5 seconds instead of 30-60.

Pro Tips
1 setup-node@v4 handles npm caching automatically
2 Cache invalidates when package-lock.json changes
3 Saves bandwidth and time on every run
4 Works with npm, yarn, and pnpm
5 GitHub provides 10GB cache storage per repository
